I am so excited to be here everything in
America is so much bigger than in Europe
look at me I am huge it's it's fantastic
and TED talks TED talks are where
everybody has great ideas so the
question is where do those great ideas
come from well it's a little bit of
debate but it's generally reckoned that
the average person that's me has about
50,000 thoughts a day which is a lot
until you realize that 95% of them are
the same ones you had the day before and
a lot of mine are really boring okay I
think things like oh I know I must clean
the floor or I I forgot to walk the dog
my most popular don't eat that cookie
okay so 95% repetition that leaves us
with just a 5% window of opportunity
each day to actually think something new
okay and some of my new thoughts are
useless so the other day I was watching
some sports on television and I've tried
to decide why I just don't engage with
it okay I'm some of it I find curious
this is odd do you think it would be
worth being that flexible just to be
able to see your heel at that angle
later and here's the thing here's
a--they I'm never gonna be able to rate
to that because I'm never going to be
able to do it okay well not twice anyway
and them
but I tell you the truth the truth is I
have never been any good at sport
okay I've reached that wonderful age now
where all my friends say oh I wish I was
as fit as I was when I was 18 and I
always feel rather smug then I'm exactly
as fit as I was when I couldn't run then
I'm certainly not gonna do it now so
then I had my new idea okay why not
engage people like me in sport I think
what the world needs now is the Olympics
for people with zero athletic ability
okay oh it would be so much more fun
we'd have three basic rules okay
obviously no drugs no corruption no
skills it wouldn't pay no it's a
terrible it's a terrible idea and then I
also know why I don't engage with sport
when I watch it on television it's
because probably ninety seven percent of
it is about men running and men kicking
things men trying to look neatly
packaged in lycra there is not always
successfully there is there is so little
female sport on television that a young
woman watching might be forgiven for
thinking and how can I put this nicely
that the male member is the very lever
you need to get yourself off the couch
and on to a sports ground the
inequalities in sport are breathtaking
so this is what happened to me okay I
have a brand new idea and immediately I
come back to an old one the fact is
there is not now nor has there ever been
in the whole of history a single country
in the world where women have equality
with men not 196 countries it hasn't
happened in the whole of evolution okay
so here is a picture of evolution
we women are not even in it okay it's a
wonder men have been able to evolve
quite so brilliantly so it bugs me and I
know I should do something about it but
I'm busy okay I have a full-on career
I've got three kids I've got an elderly
mom in fact if I'm honest with you one
of the reasons I came out here is
because TEDTalk said I could have 15
minutes to myself and I never have that
much time
so I'm busy in anyway I already had a go
at changing the world here's the thing
okay everybody has inside themselves
what I called an activation button okay
it's the button that gets pressed when
you think I must do something about this
now
it gets pressed for all sorts of reasons
maybe you face some kind of inequality
or you've come across an injustice of
some kind sometimes an illness strikes
you're born in some way disadvantaged or
perhaps underprivileged okay so I was
born gay okay I've always known I don't
think my family were the least bit
surprised here is a picture of me aged
four okay I look cute but inside I
genuinely believe that I looked like
Clint Eastwood okay Jenny
so my activation button was pressed when
I had my kids three wonderful kids born
to my then partner now his thing I work
on television in Britain by the time
they were born as already hosting my own
shows and working in the public eye I
love what I do but I love my kids more
and I didn't want them to grow up with a
secret and 1994 when my son my youngest
was born there was not as far as I was
aware a single out gay woman in British
public life I don't think secrets are a
good thing I think they are a cancer of
the soul so I decided to come out
everybody warned me that I would never
work again but I decided it was
absolutely worth the risk well it was
hell in Britain we have a particularly
vicious section of the right-wing press
and they went nuts and their hatred
stirred up the less stable elements of
society and we got death threats enough
death threats that I had to take the
kids into hiding and we had to have
police protection and I promise you
there were many moments in the still of
the night when I was terrified by what I
had done eventually the dust settled
against all expectation I carried on
working and my kids were and continue to
be absolutely fantastic I remember when
my son was six he had a friend ever to
play and they were in the next room
hear them chatting and the friend said
to my son what's it like having two mums
whereas a little anxious to his head
leant into here my son said it's
fantastic because if one of them's sick
you've still got another one to cook for
you so my activation button for gay
equality was pressed and along with many
many others I campaigned for years for
gay rights and in particular the right
to marry the person that I love and in
the end we succeeded and in 2014 on the
day that the law was changed I married
my wife well of very much indeed we
didn't do it in a quiet way we did it on
the stage at the Royal Festival Hall in
London
it was a great event the hall seats two
and a half thousand people and what we
did was we invited 150 family and
friends and then I let it be known to
the public anybody who wanted to come
and celebrate please come and join us it
was going to be free to anybody who
wanted to come two and a half thousand
people turned up
every kind of person you can imagine
gays straights rabbis nuns married
people black/white well the whole of
humanity was there and I remember
standing on that stage thinking how
fantastic job done love triumphs law
changed and I I genuinely thought my
activation days were over okay so every
year in that same Hall I host a
fantastic concert at to celebrate
International Women's Day and we gather
the world's only all-female Orchestra we
play fantastic music by forgotten or
overlooked a living composers with
amazing conductors it's Marin Alsop
they're from Baltimore conducting Petula
Clark's singing and I give a lecture on
women's history okay I love to gather
inspirational stories from the past and
pass them on too often I think history
is what I call the Mount Rushmore model
okay it looks majestic but the women
have been entirely left out of it and I
was giving a talk in 2015 about the
suffragettes I'm sure you know those
magnificent women who fought so hard for
the right for women in Britain to vote
and their slogan was deeds not words and
boy they succeeded because women did
indeed get the vote in 1928 so I'm
giving this talk about this and as I'm
talking what I realized is this was not
a history lecture I was giving this is
not something where the job was done
this was something where there was so
much left to do nowhere in the world for
example do women have equal
representation in positions of power
okay let's take a very quick look at the
top 100 companies in the London Stock
Exchange in 2016 top 100 companies how
many women running them seven okay seven
us all right I suppose until you realize
that 17 are run by men called John
there are more men called John running
footsie 100 companies then there are
women there are 14 run by men called
Dave
now I'm sure Dave and John doing a
bang-up job okay
why does it matter well it's that pesky
business of the gender pay gap okay
nowhere in the world do women earn the
same as men and that is never going to
change unless we have more women at the
top in the boardroom with plenty of laws
the Equal Pay Act in Britain was passed
in 1975 nevertheless there are still
many many women who from earlier
November until the end of the year by
comparison to their male colleagues are
effectively working for free in fact the
World Economic Forum estimates that
women will finally get equal pay in 2133
yay
that's a terrible figure and here's the
thing the day before I came out to give
my talk the World Economic Forum revised
it so that's good right because that's a
terrible 2133 do not they revised it to
20 186 yeah another 53 years okay we are
not going to get equal pay in my
grandchildren's grandchildren's lives
under the current system and I have
waited long enough
I've waited long enough in my own
business in 2016 I became the very first
woman on British television to host a
prime-time panel show isn't there great
one flem thrilled but hahaha 2016 the
first elephants been around for 80 years
okay so maybe televisions not so
important but it's kind of symptomatic
isn't it you know 2016 the UN were
looking for a brand new ambassador at to
represent women's empowerment and gender
equality and who did they choose Wonder
Woman yes they chose a car too
okay because no woman was up to the job
the representation of women in positions
of power is shockingly low it's true in
Congress and it's certainly true in the
British Parliament in 2015 the number of
men elected to the Parliament that year
was greater than the total number of
women who have ever been members of
parliament and why does it matter well
here's the thing if they are not at the
table literally in Britain at that table
helping to make the laws do not be
surprised if the female perspective is
overlooked now it's a great role model
okay for young people to see a woman in
charge in 2016
Britain got its second female Prime
Minister Therese of may I came to power
in the day she came to power she was
challenged just do one thing ago do one
thing in the first hundred days that
you're in office to try and improve
lives for women in Britain and what did
she do nothing nothing but she's much
too busy cleaning up the mess the boys
made even having a female leader they
always find something better to do than
to sort out the pesky issue of
inequality so keep talking about
equality like it matters does it well
let's take a very quick look at the stem
industries okay so science technology
engineering and mathematics pretty much
important in every single aspect of our
daily lives there is the thickest and
most incredibly well documented glass
ceiling in the stem industries what if
the cure for cancer or the answer the
global warming lies in the head of a
young female scientist who fails to
progress so I thought all these things
and I knew I had to do deeds not words
and I spoke to my wonderful friend
brilliant journalist Catherine Mayer in
Britain and we rather foolishly and I I
suspect there was wine involved we
decided to found a brand new political
party cuz here's the critical thing the
one place women and men are absolutely
equal is at the ballot box okay we had
no idea what we were doing we didn't
know how
application it wants to start a
political party I thought it cannot be
that difficult men have been doing it
for years so we started by calling it
the women's equality party okay and
straight away people said to me why did
you call it that I said I don't know I
just thought we'd be clear and I didn't
want what we're doing to be a secret you
know I just and that's a people said you
can't call it that is much too feminist
all scary word oh I can't tell you how
many times I've heard somebody say I'm
not a feminist but and I always think if
there's a but in the sentence he can't
all be roses in the garden and then I
started getting asked the hilarious
question are you all going to burn your
bras yes because bras are famously made
of flammable material that's why all
women spark when they walk is a quick
history sidebar for you and no woman
ever burned her bra in the 60s it's a
story made up by a journalist I thank
goodness that journalism has improved
since then so I announced what we were
gonna do in a broadcast interview and
straight away the emails started coming
first hundreds then thousands and
thousands from every age group from the
very young to women in their 90's
to hundreds of wonderful men people
wrote and said please can I help please
can I visit you at Party headquarters
wait we didn't have a headquarters with
another party we didn't we didn't have
anything all we had was a wonderful
tight group of fabulous friends trying
to answer emails pretty much 24/7 in our
pajamas
we were all busy many of us had careers
many of us had children but we did what
women do and we shared the work and
almost instantly we agreed on certain
fundamental things first thing what
should be the only physical party in the
world whose main aim was to no longer
need to exist that's a fantastic idea we
wanted to be the only political party
with no particular political leaning
okay we wanted people from
left from the right from the middle
every age group because the whole point
is to work with a simple agenda
let's get equality in every aspect of
our lives and when we're finished let's
go home and get the other chores done
and we wanted to change how politics is
conducted I don't know if you have this
but in Britain we have two major
political parties okay they're the
dinosaurs of politics and how they speak
to each other is shameful and poisonous
like sure you'd never have that kind of
name-calling and lying here very great
if just one politician said do you know
my opponent has a point let's see if we
can't work together and get the job done
and let's get more women into politics
okay let's immediately get more into
politics by being the only political
party to offer free childcare to our
candidates so they can get out of the
house and start campaigning within ten
months we had more than 70 branches of
our party across the UK we stood
candidates for election in London
Scotland and Wales in May 2016
one in 20 people voted for our candidate
for London mayor and when the men in the
race saw how many votes we were
attracting wonder of wonders they began
to talk about the need to tackle gender
equality
you know I've been promised change since
I was a child okay it was always coming
women were gonna stand shoulder to
shoulder with men and all I got was
empty promises and disappointment enough
disappointment to found a political
party but here is my new idea for today
this is my 5% okay and this one is
really good the fact is this is not
enough it is not enough to found one
political party for equality in a single
country what we need is a seismic change
in the global political landscape and
the wonderful thing about the model that
we have created is that it would work
anywhere it would work in America it
would work in Australia would work in
India it's like we've made the perfect
recipe anybody can cook it and is good
for everybody
okay and we want to give it away if you
want to know what we did we're giving it
away can you imagine if we could
mobilize millions of women across the
world to say that's enough to the
traditional battles of politics to say
stop the bickering let's get the work
done we could literally change the world
and I want that
I want I want that for our daughters and
I want it for our sons because the fact
is equality is better for everyone come
on people let's activate let's change
the world I know we can do it and it was
doing
you